.Dd May 17, 2020
.Dt RIZIN 1
.Sh NAME
.Nm rizin
.Nd Advanced commandline hexadecimal editor, disassembler and debugger
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm rizin
.Op Fl a Ar arch
.Op Fl b Ar bits
.Op Fl B Ar baddr
.Op Fl c Ar cmd
.Op Fl e Ar k=v
.Op Fl i Ar file
.Op Fl I Ar prefile
.Op Fl k Ar kernel
.Op Fl m Ar addr
.Op Fl p Ar project
.Op Fl P Ar patch
.Op Fl r Ar rz-run
.Op Fl R Ar rz-run-directives
.Op Fl s Ar addr
.Op Fl 0AdDwntLquvVxX
.Ar -|--|=|file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
rizin is a commandline hexadecimal editor.
.Pp
This manpage is not updated yet. Feel free to contribute.
.Pp
The options are:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl Fl
Open rizin on an empty file
.It Fl
Equivalent of 'rizin malloc://512'
.It Fl 0
Print \\x00 after initialization and after every command executed
.It Fl 2
Close stderr before starting RzCore
.It Fl a Ar arch
force asm.arch (x86, ppc, arm, mips, bf, java, ...)
.It Fl A
run 'aaa' command before prompt or patch to analyze all referenced code. Use -AA to run aaaa
.It Fl b Ar bits
force asm.bits (16, 32, 64)
.It Fl B Ar baddr
Specify the base address to be used when loading a new binary. See 'e?bin.baddr'
.It Fl c Ar cmd
Execute the given command before giving prompt
.It Fl d
Start in debugger mode
.It Fl D Ar dbg.backend
Enable debug mode. Set cfg.debug=true
.It Fl e Ar k=v
Set configuration eval variable key=value. For example \-e scr.color=false
.It Fl f
Blocksize = file size
.It Fl i Ar file
Run script file. After the file is loaded
.It Fl I Ar file
Run script file. Before the file is loaded
.It Fl k Ar kernel
Select kernel (asm.os) for syscall resolution
.It Fl l Ar plugfile
Load given plugin file
.It Fl L
List supported IO plugins.
.It Fl m Ar addr
map file at given address
.It Fl M
Disable demangling
.It Fl n
Do not perform any analysis (r_bin). Just load the raw file
.It Fl nn
Only load the rbin structures (elf, mach0, ...)
.It Fl N
Do not load user settings/projects from ~/.rizinrc, ~/.config/rizin/rizinrc and the scripts inside .../rizinrc.d/ directory.
.It Fl NN
Same as -N but also disables the automatic loading of plugins on startup time
.It Fl q
Quiet mode (no prompt) and quit after running the commands specified with -i or -c
.It Fl qq
Quit before showing the prompt. Right after all the -e -c and -i arguments are evaluated.
.It Fl Q
Same as q, but exiting without freeing RzCore, this produces leaks at exit time, but saves some precious ms to run the testsuite in fast mode.
.It Fl p Ar prj
Set project file
.It Fl r Ar rz-run
Specify dbg.profile rz-run profile to use when spawning a program for debugging
.It Fl R Ar rz-run-directive
Specify custom rz-run directives without having to create a rz-run profile
.It Fl s Ar addr
Start seeking at this address
.It Fl t
Get binary information using a thread
.It Fl T
Avoid computing the file hashes
.It Fl u
Set bin.filter=false to load rbin info without filtering names
.It Fl v
Show version information and exit (Use -qv to get just the version number)
.It Fl V
Show rizin library versions
.It Fl w
Open in write mode
.It Fl h
Show help message
.It Fl H
Show files and environment help
.It Fl x
Open the file map without executable permissions
.It Fl X
Same as -e bin.usextr=false, do not use extract plugins, useful for dyldcache
.El
.Sh SHELL
Type '?' for help
.Pp
.Sh VISUAL
To enter visual mode use the 'V' command. Then press '?' for help
.Sh DEBUGGER
In rizin the debugger commands are implemented under the 'd' command. Type 'd?' for help
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
 RZ_CFG_OLDSHELL sets cfg.newshell=false
 RZ_DEBUG      if defined, show error messages and crash signal
 RZ_DEBUG_ASSERT=1 set a breakpoint when hitting an assert
 RZ_MAGICPATH /Users/pancake/.local/share/rizin/share/rizin/4.5.0-git/magic
 RZ_NOPLUGINS do not load rizin shared plugins
 RZ_RCFILE    ~/.rizinrc (user preferences, batch script)
 RZ_RDATAHOME /usr/local
.Ar FILE
path to the current working file.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Pp
.Xr rz-test(1) ,
.Xr rz-hash(1) ,
.Xr rz-find(1) ,
.Xr rz-bin(1) ,
.Xr rz-diff(1) ,
.Xr rz-asm(1) ,
.Xr rz-ax(1) ,
.Xr rz-gg(1) ,
.Xr rz-run(1) ,
.Sh AUTHORS
.Pp
pancake <pancake@nopcode.org>
