.Dd Aug 25, 2023
.Dt RZ_DIFF 1
.Sh NAME
.Nm RZ_DIFF
.Nd Compare files and find binary differences.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm rz-diff
.B rz-diff
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
\fIfile0\fR
\fIfile1\fR
.Sh DESCRIPTION
rz-diff compares two files or binary programs and highlights the differences between them. It supports diffing different aspects like raw bytes, text lines, functions, sections, strings, etc., based on the options used.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl A
compare virtual addresses from file0 with physical addresses in file1.
.It Fl a Ar [arch]	
specify the architecture plugin to use for analysis (e.g., x86, arm).
.It Fl b Ar [bits]
specify the register size for the chosen architecture (e.g., 16, 32, 64).
.It Fl B
run 'aaa' when loading the binary.
.It Fl C
disable the use of colors in the output.
.It Fl d Ar [algo]
compute the edit distance between files using the chosen algorithm:
                myers | Eugene W. Myers' O(ND) algorithm (no substitution)
                leven | Levenshtein O(N^2) algorithm (with substitution
               ssdeep | Context triggered piecewise hashing comparison
.It Fl e Ar [k=v]
set an evaluable config variable.
.It Fl H 
enable hexadecimal visual mode for comparing files in hexadecimal format.
.It Fl h
display the help message.
.It Fl i 
use command line arguments instead of files (only for -d).
.It Fl j
output the comparison results in JSON format.
.It Fl q
generate quiet output with minimal information.
.It Fl 0 Ar [cmd]
input for file0 when option -t 'commands' is given.
.It Fl 1 Ar [cmd]
input for file1 when option -t 'commands' is given.
.It Fl S Ar [WxH]
set the width and height of the terminal for visual mode.
.It Fl t Ar [type]
compute the difference between two files based on the specified type:
              bytes      | Compares raw bytes in the files (only for small files)
              lines      | Compares text files
              functions  | Compares functions found in the files
              classes    | Compares classes found in the files
              command    | Compares command output returned when executed in both files
                         | Requires -0 <cmd>, -1 <cmd> is optional
              entries    | Compares entries found in the files
              fields     | Compares fields found in the files
              graphs     | Compares 2 functions and outputs in graphviz/dot format
                         | Requires -0 <fcn name|offset>, -1 <fcn name|offset> is optional
              imports    | Compares imports found in the files
              libraries  | Compares libraries found in the files
              sections   | Compares sections found in the files
              strings    | Compares strings found in the files
              symbols    | Compares symbols found in the files
.It Fl T
show timestamp information in the output.
.It Fl v
show version information for rz-diff.
.Pp 
palette colors can be changed by adding the following lines
          inside the $HOME/.rizinrc file
  ec diff.unknown blue   | offset color
  ec diff.match   green  | match color
  ec diff.unmatch red    | mismatch color	
.Sh EXAMPLE
       Compare two binary files using the default settings:
              rz-diff file1.bin file2.bin

       Compare two text files and display the output in JSON format:
              rz-diff -j -t lines file1.txt file2.txt

       Compare two functions from an architecture plugin:
              rz-diff -t graphs -0 function1 -1 function2 binary1 binary2
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Pp
.Xr rizin(1) ,
.Xr rz-find(1) ,
.Xr rz-hash(1) ,
.Xr rz-bin(1) ,
.Xr rz-asm(1) ,
.Xr rz-gg(1) ,
.Xr rz-run(1) ,
.Xr rz-ax(1) ,
.Sh AUTHORS
.Pp
pancake <pancake@nopcode.org>
.It  
Sohail  <sksohail.swaraj@gmail.com>
